1. What is Web 3.0 and how is it different from Web 1.0 and Web 2.0?

Web 1.0 being a set of static web pages, existed purely for (passive) information consumption. 

Web 2.0 brings upon more enhanced communication channels , as opposed to the previous one-way setup of Web 1.0, 
and creates more dynamic web pages that promote user interaction and collaboration. 

A key example would be social networking sites like Facebook and Twitter (X).
It is also marked by the emergence of web applications like Gmail (to name a few).

Web 3.0 is said to be the next generation in the evolutionary progression of the world wide web, 
building on its predecessors Web1.0 and Web 2.0 to enhance existing functionality and introduce new systems/technologies 
to improve user experience (enhanced personalised content, control over their own data - perhaps) 

2. What are the functional differences between the front end of a web application and its back end?

The front-end of a web application, or the presentation layer, 
is the part that the user will see and be able to interact with.
Whereas the back-end, or data access layer, refers to the part which is responsible for returning the page, 
and for storing or fetching user data. The typical user does not see this part.

3. In your own words, explain the process that takes place from when you type a URL into the address bar in your browser 
until you finally view the page you have requested. 

In order to access information on the Web, a URL is used to locate what is requested. 
When the URL is typed into the address bar of a browser, the browser needs to connect to a particular web server (as defined in the URL) 
in order to send a request for the desired web page. 

The web server receives this request and usually returns the page (directory). 

If it cannot be found, the server will send an error message instead. 
Once the browser receives the information, the connection will be closed and it will load the page 
(and all other elements) within the browser window.
